earlier Kimberly may not so uh thank you
everybody for joining us this evening
this is the town of Andover Board of
Finance uh special budget Workshop
meeting for Wednesday April 3D
2024 um we will uh start uh by calling
the meeting to order and we'll recite
the Pledge of Allegiance so we'll start
I pledge allegiance to the flag of the
United States of America to the Republic
for which it stands one
nation
liberty and
justice okay thank you um our next
agenda item is to open it up for public
speak um I know we have uh various
members of the community we've asked to
be here to kind of discuss the budget
options is there anybody from the public
that would like to
speak Eric do you want to go around sure
so uh first up would be Linda fish
just here to listen I don't miss being
there okay so on Linda Wally do you want
to talk about anything other than how it
relates to the registrar's
office no okay carolie do you want to
talk about anything other than your own
respective position as the town clerk no
thank you okay so next up is Jan
mashy
okay Jan you're
muted hi
everyone he Jen is it better now y y yep
we can hear
you okay good okay
good Dan did you have anything to
anything you wanted to uh bring before
the board of Finance any public
comment
I I did um so my name is Gian mashy I am
a volunteer at the endover food
pantry um been doing it for a couple of
years I
guess
um we're currently open you know twice a
week um seeing about 200 families a
month um many of our families are senior
citizens from from Andover but we're
open you know we provide anybody that
comes we provide them with
food
so prior to
covid um we were
getting um all our food other than
donation you know personal donations we
were getting it from food chair in in
Wallingford they were supplying
everything to the
pantries um but that changed with
covid
and now we have to pay for items so our
pantry the two you know with the 200
people um we're we get a monthly order
from food share and it's probably
between 750 to ,000 a
month um
so we've been scalling you know pretty
much um we do a you know the big pumpkin
patch that's our
biggest
um
fundraiser
um the the issue probably were the
holidays so for Thanksgiving food share
helps us out a lot with turkeys and
potatoes and vegetables and all that
kind of stuff but for Christmas and like
Easter um they don't because it's uh you
know they consider it a um a not a
Catholic holiday but you know a
religious holiday and so therefore they
don't so you know everybody's used to
getting those items the hams and
everything like that and um you know it
it's just costing us a lot of extra
money um than we were used to so we're
trying in in many ways to try to find as
many fundraisers as possible um I have a
new one starting uh Connecticut Fu chair
is doing a a wathon um in May and if you
if you make a donation um on their
website and you like indicate um Andover
food pantry 100% of that um money goes
to Andover food pantry so we're hoping
but right now I'm going to say donations
are really really
low
um
so you know I haven't been doing this
very long but I had
heard that there might be money at the
town um that they could help contribute
to the food pantry and that's why I'm
here so I'm here to request that if
possible if there's if there's money and
I'm not going to say extra money because
I know everybody's tight but if there
was any way that um the town could you
know put a line item in and give us uh
some kind of money contribution I don't
know even what to call it um but to help
us uh you know purchase some food for a
couple of months or um you know we are
we're also in the process of trying to
do some
Renovations um at the pantry I did um
put in a grant request to Connecticut
food chare for that um you know it's
just okay it's just hard to come up with
money that's
basically I would why I'm here so I was
just wondering if there's any way that
you could consider
us yeah I think there's two there's two
comments I would make um so I bill I see
your hand up just a second I'll give you
floor um the one is that this would
really be a per a decision that would
should go before the board of Selectmen
and especially if you want something in
this in this budget year which extends
through the end of June so the board of
Finance really doesn't have authority on
Direct spend of the of the money um we
have approval um responsibility over
certain expenditures
and we do have some control over the
proposed budget which is what we're
doing here now but that would not affect
this budget year we we we don't we don't
decide where the town spends the money
we just decide how to fund the budget
and then give some approval to certain
Capital expenditures so that's kind of
how that would work um so we can
probably talk about that offline but I
would suggest also approaching the board
of Selectmen specifically about this
because they're really the executive
authority of the town so and and Bill
you want to go ahead and comment on that
or add to that yeah I I would say um how
first of all hi Jan uh miss having you
on the zoning board of appeals um so
listen I'm involved with a charity
through my church which is um which is
Trinity Covenant Church in Manchester we
have a thing called hope for 10 and we
give out free food once a month on a
Friday it's called free food Friday and
we get gobs of free food from the
Midwest Food Bank of New England yeah
and I we know about them but they're
they're not taking any new okay they're
not taking any new people right now okay
all right just thought i' throw it out
there CH Christa and Hein had
given okay because I know I'm going on
Monday yeah I mean you can put it in a
good word for us but I
know every time I go in there it's a
giga Food Warehouse it's just just gobs
of food I can't believe they're not
taking anybody new it seems like they
have more than enough food but anyways
I'll leave it at that just thought I'd
throw that out
there and what was it name again it's in
Manchester right it's the old uh Allied
printing is Midwest food bank I have a
phone number you want
it okay other Joan did you want to make
a comment yeah I just wanted to add I
mean I love to I'm glad you came before
us just to speak of your needs so that
you could get some um suggestions Jan I
was just going to maybe propose to Eric
that that um we send out one of our
townwide messages you know this would be
a great I know that everybody has giving
hearts and if you're not thinking about
it or you don't know about it you don't
you know I think if we got a townwide
message um over the radio or over the
little email or whatever I get just
saying that the food bank could really
use some donations there's very low if
anyone wants to give you know give the
directions I would you know of where
they can drop off food I mean it can't
hurt I know that everybody like likes to
give and in our own town that would be
great um so thank you Jan for coming
before us tonight good
luck okay thanks Jan um Eric do you want
to move on who else we have here I see
Linda and I see Kimberly TR okay I
believe that's it for everybody that's
not appearing before you in an official
Capac yeah you ask through everyone else
did you want to ask Linda too Linda
Derek
sure Linda Derek do you want to comment
on anything other than regist our stuff
no thank
you okay very good thank you Kim you
joined us thanks for joining know you
have a lot going on today
okay we will move on to our next uh item
on our agenda which is the audit review
and corrective action plan discussion
with
AES
don't know if we want to entertain any
comment or business on that I know we
still have a pending uh meeting that is
scheduled I believe for
Monday um a week from Monday the 15th so
or at least there's a meeting schedule
yeah Joanne I was surprised to see this
on the the agenda did did you request it
or I know I didn't maybe Eric wanted it
I didn't it's probably just a hold over
because oh okay I thought it was
preliminary because I know we're going
to meet and then we'll come back to the
board and and discuss it so good to know
thank
you any other comments on Des before we
move
on okay we'll move into agenda item four
which is to get into the me of the
budget workshop for the fiscal year 2023
2024 um we do have several visitors
tonight we'll try to uh move through
this quickly to allow you to uh go on
with your with your lives we do
appreciate you uh coming for the board
of Finance uh we know it's uh your
personal time here
um the board did have some questions we
were hoping to hear from you about uh
what you're looking for in the budget
line uh we've got some requests for
increases and it's just good for the
board to hear directly from you about uh
What uh what's prompting the request and
how you feel about it and uh uh just any
facts that we should have regarding that
so we'll start with the town clerk so uh
Carol you want to go ahead and uh kind
of fill us in on what you're looking for
here
okay so basically all of the budget is
the same except I did ask for a 5%
increase in my salary line um that's due
to the a lot of the election
responsibilities and
duties have increased and are increasing
which requires additional
hours sometimes like yesterday just for
the presidential preference primary
obviously 5:30 in the morning till about
9:30 at night so you know when we have
these
events it's a 15 18 hour
days and there's a lot coming down the
road as far as absente ballots of course
you know about the early
voting so that just puts a lot of
additional duties on the
office
oh and I did just ask for the 5% because
if you're last year you had given um
thank you very much very generous and
you also gave the supplemental line so I
just had asked for the 5% on the
salary rather than do five on that line
and five on the supplemental and that
resulted in
$310 more than would have been if each
of the lines were by the 4% that was
approved okay so to clarify just uh your
requesting basically 5% on the regular
uh salary line item but no increase on
the supplemental correct okay all right
thanks just wanted to make sure we had
that clear because there's some
confusion
there okay anybody have any questions
for
Carol Jan yeah I just wanted to Echo
your thank you all for coming tonight um
we also want to make it clear that if we
ever do request for you to come forward
like we'll work at your convenience you
know if if we pick a night and it's not
good for you please let us know that we
just wanted to um you know as you know
the board of selectman had put across a
4% pretty much raise for the nonunion
people so it's always good to hear from
you um in particular so thanks again for
coming forward and thank you for
clarifying that it's not on the
supplemental I think the spreadsheet had
pointed that out um and thank you that's
all thank
you okay other questions for
Carol okay hearing none I guess uh we'll
go ahead and move on thanks Carol we
appreciate the time and the work that
you do thank you right uh next we have
the regist drers um so we have Wally and
so again I think the same question
basically from the board of Finance just
kind of wanted to hear what uh your
position was about the proposed
increases um you know as Carol mentioned
we have the early voting we know that's
what addition excuse me additional
burden on the regist Arts as
well so I don't know who wants to start
first do you want to
start I don't care Linda if you want to
go first go ahead ladies first
oh um so yeah I mean I guess the first
thing to say is that there's a lot of
unknown and unpredictability about what
the next year is going to look like for
us um we can I can tell you that we will
with with a with the currently scheduled
early voting there's seven days before
the August primary seven 10 out well
eight hour days 10 hour days it uh
varies then there's 14 days prior to the
November election so that's a lot of
Staffing and and one of the unclarities
is how much Staffing we need so it's
hard to predict um in this first
experience of the four days prior to the
PPP um we went with minimal Staffing
just what we absolutely needed which is
two registar a Republican and Democrat
and a
moderator um and we had we we 20 people
voted so then we had the PPP and what
Wally maybe
2% of but it's it's a it's a peculiar
event to
judge the popularity of early voting
because it was a sort of non-event
event um but when we come into the
November preparation now we will have um
absentee ballots which Carol will be
working on we'll have early voting and
we'll have same day
registration so that will require a
little bit more Staffing different
Staffing uh so we have we're in the
process of
training some people extra more staff
because we we have great election
workers for sure but this you know 14
days uh 10hour days and and a 12-h hour
couple of 12-hour days is a is different
than what most of us have been
accustomed to so we just have to get
used to that and and figure it out so
there's a lot of unknown we you know you
know about the $10,000 that weed from
the state that every town received so
that's in the budget while you can speak
to that more as a line item and right
now we're using that uh singularly for
early voting so that we keep separate
what we had budgeted for elections
and um so forth with the early voting
next year we don't know there is talk of
further funding from the state but it's
not procured and it's not clear how it's
going to get distributed we're a small
town so proportionately it might be a
small increment so Wall-E did his best
in the budget to to
um make sure that we had enough that we
didn't have get in a situation where you
know in in late
October uh or at some point we suddenly
run out of money so he tried to you know
with our best
guess
um make that budget reflect what we
think we're going to
need so
Wally take it away
all right thank you
basically we're only looking for a 3%
increase in our salary for our normal
duties 5% overall for the uh registra
budget um increasing things like meals
because of course you all know what it
costs to go out to eat now and uh we do
pay our election
workers and as far as the elections last
year we increased our budget
substantially for election salaries
knowing that this year we were going
into the unknown of early voting and
even though we got the 10,500 from the
state we already anticipate that we will
run out of that money for early voting
prior to the November actual election
date because of the number of days and
hours the state requires and again
election supplies is up because we have
to order extra materials and again meals
for elections is up again we feed our
people because what we pay them to get
them to continue to come and work for us
we figure at least one meal a day helps
keep the election workers that we have
so basically it's 5% increase on both
budgets and we are using the early
voting
monies that we got from the state that
was set up in a special account just for
us to use for early voting to cover as
much of this as we can before we have to
go back to our regular budget and two
other things when Linda talked to the
unknown we have a brand new voter
registration system due to roll out
sometime this year and the election
management system that we presently use
is going to be modified as
well the state has promised us training
on those before they roll out but
historically early voting we got our
final instruction manual one week before
early voting started so our fear is that
some of these other changes will come
very shortly before they're implemented
and we'll have to run around to adapt to
these new systems and again all of this
is being mandated by the state of
Connecticut and the Secretary of State's
office it isn't that we want to do all
this stuff it's that we're required to
and willing to answer any
questions okay thanks Wally it's helpful
I think um anybody have any questions or
comments for
Wally I probably I do I probably
shouldn't know this but thank you both
for being here how many the two of you
are the registers and then I know the
the election workers that come in how
many registar are there total two
registar two deputies okay yeah we are
technically full-time even though it's a
part-time job Linda and I and we bring
in the deputies when we need them and
then the poll workers for the
elections a really nice run system I
know that um and thank you for pointing
out and those I think that's why I
particularly had wanted to hear just
remembering and you alluded to it that
and Carol did too that last year luckily
we were able to um I believe you all had
requested you know more of a
sizable increase due to all the
increased duties and in anticipation of
what was coming and of course Carol last
year we went through with her too when
she laid it all out for us and we were
able to give the sizable raise last year
so that was the question this year that
you know um bringing you forward to
speak to it so thanks again that's
that's all my
questions okay anybody
else okay very good thank you for your
help uh explaining guys and uh again
thank you for the work that you do we'll
uh move on to the uh planning and
zoning uh budgets so I guess
that's thought we said J oh there he is
okay
yeah so the first com first item up was
H you know discussion about the zoning
agent and and he certainly does a lot of
work for people other than the Planning
and Zoning
commission um but I'd always thought
that I use I could use up all the hours
we had allotted to him by myself and and
always felt a little bit guilty in doing
that um so for last year's budget I put
a little addendum that just talked about
uh the fact that I know and I haven't
asked him specific hours but I know he
puts in a lot more hours than we've been
paying them
for and we've got a couple of issues uh
you know there a lot of enforcement
issues with the the planning and zoning
regulations and he's spending an awful
lot of
time working those issues and that could
be very frustrating for you know the
people that uh you know don't want to
comply with the regulations just do what
they want then we're trying to get that
result without necessarily going to
court um so I know you know the the
classic example right now we're working
hard to get the Gravel Pit across from
Dollar General restored properly and and
we're having a hard time dealing with
the uh the property owner there to uh
get that
right the other thing that came along
within the last year you know last year
we passed that ordinance on
blade and so that uh you know Jim's the
guy who who takes care of all those
blight issues as well and I think that's
a very powerful tool for the town to get
some things fixed up but again that's
going to increase his workload and and
each of those things things aren't the
most fun task in the world to go get
somebody in compliance with fixing up
the property and again it always takes a
lot of time and I know Jim works very
hard to try and get the issues resolved
without going to court because if we end
up going to court with all the legal
fees and all that uh you know that uh
really goes through the roof so with
that you know my recommendation for last
year's budget was to increase his hours
from 15 to 20 I think Eric told me that
you know this year's budget uh accounts
for 19 hours I'm not sure why 19's
better than 20 but uh but anyhow I do
feel very strongly that uh you know
Jim's
working uh good for the town doing good
things above and beyond what the Call of
Duty is there and and we should pay him
for a few more than we are right
now yeah that's uh that's that's helpful
explanation I think very good um any
anybody have any specific questions
about the zoning Agent salary hour
increase okay I guess we'll go into open
space fund okay open space probably a
little harder to justify but uh you know
the town used to have $50,000 a year in
the budget to build up the open space
account we haven't had that in several
years and I don't know exactly when that
went away but you know our plan of
conservation and
development talks about uh you know the
last time we we created that document
we're updating it now but um people were
asked what are you willing to pay more
taxes for and there were three things uh
one of which was open space the other
was conservation which is very closely
tied to open space and then the third
was uh the
school and
so I thought that uh knowing that the
rant budget you know was going down a
little bit um this would be a good time
to try to get a little extra money put
back in the budget $50,000 today isn't
what $50,000 was five or 10 years ago
but you know last year we tried to buy a
piece of property leano property off of
uh shotty Mill Road and uh you the the
state's got a goal that we should have
like 21% of our land in open space we've
got to come up with 284 acres to do that
the last plan of conservation and
development thought that that would be
very easy for us to do um we haven't
added much to the open space roles in
the
meantime and
uh the state to encourage us to meet
that goal you know at least on the Le
property they were willing to pay 50% of
the price so you know it's it's kind of
a bargain for us but we didn't have
enough money in our account to uh raise
our our opening bid if you will and so I
thought it was time why we have a little
break before I think in the future the
education budgets might start going up
again uh maybe we can't keep that money
in the budget forever but uh we can
build build on it why we can because
that's what the people of the Town say
they're in favor of
doing okay very good uh helpful comments
and context does anybody have any
questions for
Jed comments thank you for clarifying
that that was that was well said and
thank you for clarifying that that's
what the taxpayers have voted on that's
really important to me especially in
this this year right where they would
like their funds to go and and I hadn't
been pushing the issue you know before
now because the budgets had been very
tight it's been uh hard but but that's
what the people say they want and uh and
I don't see it getting any better you
know this is as good as it gets to put
it in
now and Jed we did ask Eric to provide
us with the balances and all the funds
so it's good to see that the open space
fund does have you know some money
already there and then to keep adding to
it little by little so yep if if a great
piece of property comes along and we've
got a chance to get it it would be nice
to be in a position where we'd be able
to do so y thank you
again thank
you any other further questions or
comments for
Jed Jed
sorry okay here we none I guess uh I
guess we're good thanks very much we
appreciate it uh and again thank you for
uh for what you guys
do okay we will go ahead and move on to
our agenda item 4D which is our actual
uh budget review um the intention uh
tonight uh for the board was to try to
go start to go through this line by line
uh you know really kind of figure out
any real concerns we have over specific
line items work those through and
eventually work our way to the end of
the budget which is probably not going
to happen
tonight um I know I don't have that kind
of staying power and the hisory is any
indicator it'll take some time to do
that uh but we'll go ahead and get
started um so I'm going to share my
screen just because I have in in front
of me if that'll work Eric can you give
me that ability
sure I thought I already did hang on
yeah it looks like I it says
disabled try that
now yep got it
okay okay you should be seeing the
uh the Excel file
now um I don't know is that readable for
you guys can it get a little bigger or
get a lot bigger it's just we lose a
little little we lose a little bit on
the outside yeah but I'll try to I'll
try to bring it down so um just the
first point of order I think we had this
well they I shared over email
that the the original uh column K had a
calculated increase um differential uh
had the formula was was uh misstated so
I think that that um can go away um so
in this column L I'm just going to hide
this column now so column L actually
shows the corrected percentage
increase uh the change to each line
basically was if there was a small
change year-over-year it really didn't
drive much of a change in the percent
difference if there was a large change
it did drive you know a significant
change in the percent difference um you
know nothing I think that was super huge
but I think I think it just Bears you
know mentioning uh that that's
differential from what we had so all
right I guess the first question I would
have is let's kind of take maybe the
revenue uh as a as a group I didn't have
any specific questions on many of the
revenue items except that there's
there's a lot of uh Eric there's a lot
of uh Assumption of increase on prior
taxes lean taxes and interest taxes
those just you know
significant oh actually that's not right
they're zeros
why did I have that must have looked at
something different never
mind so for the record I I worked with
the tax collector and we we are
anticipating being more aggressive this
year than we have been in the past and I
think for one year we can increase that
number but as we work off some of the
back stuff in in future years you know
as we have less prior taxes to collect
that number will go back down if that
makes
sense they those make sense okay yeah
it's good to be aware of well I must
have been looking at the previous year's
budget hope do that sometimes skip the
uh fact I may even do this to make it
more viewable unless anybody really
needs to look at 2122 or even
2223 yeah really well I like to keep
some of them open I don't want to shut
everything but do you
but what why did you want to do that
Mark I don't whatever you well just so
we
we for the ability to kind of check and
read some of the notes that's all oh
okay gotcha yeah there isn't much that
and I can just scroll over yeah okay so
if it's okay great to close at 22 23 if
it's not yeah that one's fine I guess I
just it that that's significant for you
know because each year does help a
little but that's yeah sometimes it's
it's worth seeing the trend right we
want to go back and check it out okay
especially just just comparing one year
is hard because we had I would like to
see it if you don't mind right
especially someone that wasn't here
thank you yeah Mark maybe you don't mind
those changes you want to see the other
ones too okay no no I did take some time
earlier today to take a look at this um
but if if you could leave the 22 23 and
onward yeah yeah really helpful to
me all right so State miscellaneous Eric
we've got quite a bit of increase here
is that just says not set yet is there
any just reason the reason we had that
increase yeah there's there's a should
be so in state
miscellaneous there's that's a oh man I
gotta I gotta look at what the the thing
is but there's about a
$5,000 uh increase we look like we're
going to get and this is composed of a
bunch of different little things we get
that it never really seemed appropriate
to list them all out because they're all
too small but there is one
$5,000 chunk that we're likely to get
that we haven't gotten in the past and I
can I can figure out the details on that
um uh if you want you've got a rationale
for including it though I guess that was
really just that wasn't really clear so
that's that's helpful yeah you
know part of I mean it
like part of that is for instance the
fees we get back for nips that goes into
State miscellaneous it's not a big
amount of money but it comes in a couple
times a year you know so that that's
kind of like a catchall for all the
stupid little things we get back from
the state not stupid but you know fairly
small things we get back from the
state okay got
it and Senior transportation Grand I'm
just kind of going through my comments
and we can we get back to see if anybody
else has any others but you've got
$122,000 we didn't have anything in
2324 uh but you've got you know estimate
based on previous um is there any risk
to or much risk to us getting that
or
um there's no
guarantees um actually I think we'll get
this one this coming year because we're
in the the final year of our
uh it's a multi-year allotment but we
each year we have to give them based on
we can get up to a percentage based on
what we spend on driver's costs so it
looks like we can get a little bit more
because we spent more the last couple of
years on driver's costs so we can get a
little bit more but that but you're
right it's not a
guarantee but we will probably end up
getting that amount this
year
anybody have any other question on those
Revenue
items
no I'm going to clear that out it sound
sounds reasonable to me I just wanted to
understand the uh kind of the
rationale uh miscellaneous revenues up
you know it's not a huge uh thing um you
just had a note here records Grant
should it have its own line item I don't
know what we're should we think about
budgeting something differently there I
mean it's only $5,000
so I mean I
don't again that's a catchall that's
composed of a few different fees just
like you know rentals you know come from
more than one source but I don't want to
list out you know every small little
Revenue source that we
have
um yeah so I would say no line item
there in that case would make unless
somebody feels differently we I wouldn't
want to change it no no I agree uh the
next one's a big
increase right yeah there there is some
rationale here for it um
so I know Eric if you want to talk to
that 12,500 athletic field plus the you
know so we have we uh rent essentially
our soccer field out to uh Veil
East um which used to be called FC North
we have an annual like contract with
them um so that's the bulk of what we
pull in in rental income um we also
provide the elementary school the use of
a senior Transportation vehicle and we
just charge them essentially per trip um
because it's a lot less expensive than
them using a transportation service to
provide that service and since we
already own multiple handicapped
accessible Vehicles it's you know
cheaper overall for the town so that is
just the direct you know we know we're
getting by contract
$12,500 from Veil East and based on the
last year's data we should be taking in
right about you know $5,000 for the
senior Transportation
vehicle so that's what that is
thank
you few other changes mostly small
stuff fees permits Etc but does add up
quite a bit and then of course we have
this huge one here which is the interest
Revenue line and that's all due to that
stiff account right yeah correct which
is nice yeah yeah so just amazing wow it
is all credit to Cheryl and Eric for
working at in
thank you thank you thank you yeah no
that's that's super cool um the thing to
keep in mind is
that um if we looked at
like how much we're making today the
number would even be higher than
$140,000 what I'm doing with that is I'm
assuming that over the next year there
will be some federal interest rate
reduction um how much I don't know I
mean
you know the feds they make their
reductions when they make their
reductions and that does affect the
stiff rate so I would expect next year
we'll get less money than we're getting
on a monthly basis right now is that
based on the prime lending rate or
something well something like that some
index yeah it's it's something like that
they put their money in a series of
short-term
investment vehicles but they are roughly
they are somewhat depend on the overall
interest
rate okay I think you're talking about
three from what I heard separate
decreases in the interest rate but who
knows how much they're going to
be well it probably is wise to budget
that conservatively yeah which sounds
like we've done yeah I'm hoping that I'm
budgeting it conservatively enough but
but you know
um we'll find
out any other questions from the board
on the revenue items
here and keep keep in mind that you know
all those revenues from the state there
is no state budget yet so I mean all of
that needs to be taken with some grain
of
salt um you know it's unlikely that
they're going to change but that doesn't
mean that the state can't make a change
you you know in something um you know
there's there's certainly a number of
bills that would affect various
different aspects of our budget that are
still pending
but you
know as they are every year
yeah that's all I was going to say is we
sort of wait this out every year
and luckily it's been coming
through okay well if I can scroll down
again if I if I move too fast or or you
want to back up and talk to something
else anybody on the board let me know
we'll certainly do that so the next two
line items are the ram education budget
we have no say there it kind of is what
it is uh as Eric has noted here and I
think Joan had asked this question or
somebody asked this question uh a few
meetings ago this does include the
$119,000 credit that was announced after
the original request so you can see that
differential there
um and then the we have the AES Board of
Education uh budget at 2.7% we had the
presentation on that
previously um overall education budget
in is actually a decrease of uh 2.4%
thanks to the ram decrease which uh
we've discussed before is only temporary
and I thought Jed made a good point I
had the exact same thought when he was
going through there about the open space
fund if we're going to fund it now that
would be something to do this year but
it would be something that would be
something we definitely consider for
removal maybe in the in future years if
things uh got a little tighter Mark can
I speak to that just that is it's
interesting because I think there's
going to be a lot of players go you know
we do know that the ram budget will be
down for a few years and then you know
it'll go back up so that's to be very
mindful of that as we're going through
spending you know at the end I mean it's
and there's going to be a lot of to me
things that are going to be vying for
that extra money or where where it
should go so but it is it's nice for the
town now but we have to be mindful that
in the future it will go back up yep
yep
okay found administrator 4% raise holy
crap what's all
this uh Administrative Assistant you've
actually got a big reduction that says
stip into to assistant tax collector I'm
not sure we talked about that Eric did
we what's what's the shift to there
so um traditionally this position has
had a part-time admin assistant um that
position was for basically 19 hours or
less uh no
benefits um I think right now when I
look at what I need help with the most
this is where talking about that project
manager position manager yeah my goal is
to
basically uh assign that work to the tax
collector um in exchange for stien ah
okay okay so this is not an actual
position funding this $5,000 would be a
stien to the assistant tax collector to
carry out the duties of the
administrative the administrative like
administrative duties that you've got
right because she is a union employee so
if I'm adding something to her workload
I am legally obligated to bargain with
the Union over the impact of that I can
I can just assign her the job um I have
the legal authority to do that but the
union but I'm obligated to to bargain
over the impact of that so um you know y
sorry I think overall it's a lot cheaper
to do that and what I would like to do
do is basically free up a portion of
that money to hire somebody on a very
part-time basis to be a project manager
for a couple specific projects just to
take a few things off of my plate and
really I think that's where I'm
lacking the biggest issue I have is the
ability to get projects across the
finish line and administer them um so
that's what I'm hoping for and I I know
I'm not going to find an admin assistant
at what we're paying that's going to
have that capability so I would be
looking at hiring a you know a a very
part-time project manager and depending
on the grant or the project some
projects the money can be found from
within the Project funding itself but
not all so that that's where I'm going
with that that's my desire Joan yeah I
just just following up to that Eric I
know um so is this this is already
happening now I believe right she
already so what would the stapen be is
it a flat $5,000 stapen has it increased
was it 4,000 last year or what what well
so um I told I have not signed an
agreement with Kate nor really can I
unless it looks like you're going to
budget it I mean the board of Selectmen
has already approved this but it really
has to be approved by Board of Selectmen
and board of Finance because if you're
not going to fund the line I'm not going
to enter into an agreement with so that
so there's no contract that's already
been signed I for some reason I thought
at one of the board of Selectmen
meetings maybe I heard when they
approved you should handle it this way I
mean they they they agreed with this
basic concept right no it's a good
concept I'm just asking the history and
so it hasn't started
yet um so I I've had a
conversation with the Union regarding
that and with the
employee um and I know they'll agree to
it at this level um but no we haven't
signed any sort of memorandum of
understanding regarding this yet okay
right because you have a
stapen right there has to be a scope of
work involved and everything and that's
a sizable stapen for I mean I'm sure
it's needed not talking about the price
but that's pretty sizable in a stien
amount um I work with stiens all the
time so there has to be a scope of work
that you expect and and it's great that
I understand that the person that would
be doing this was your former
Administrative Assistant now the tax
collector so she had the knowledge of
what's needed and it's it's probably a
win-win for the town I'm not opposed I
just wondered if it had started lower
than that and then it went up to this
amount thank you no there is no
agreement in place at this point
okay so it kind of leads us to the next
question if nobody's got any specific
questions on that but you've got 15,000
from this uh project manager so to me
they seemed like an unrealistically low
number but then I think you just
answered it I CL clarifying your note
there that some of the projects will
actually do some self-funding for such a
position yeah and I'm this is not gonna
be you really G get somebody to do this
for $1,200 a month you know no but but
also you have to understand that I'm not
looking
for you know I'm not expecting somebody
working for me 20 hours a week doing
this you know I'm going to pick off a
few very specific Pro projects that I
want help on and be able to pay for that
help um you know I I don't think I mean
realistically you're not going to get
anybody
that's you know for under about 50 bucks
an hour that can be an actual PM I mean
if we're being realistic so you're right
we're not buying a whole ton of hours
doing
this but you know if you can pull a
couple if we can get a couple things
done faster than we're doing now I think
that's worth it overall to the town and
I look at it and say in my
world you know it would be I mean in a
perfect world I'd love a a full-time
admin assistant and a PM that works for
but I know we're not going to be able
to um so so the question is what is the
thing that I need the absolute most and
and what can I live without and I can
certainly live without a full-time admin
assistant um although I see some value
in that you know it's just the fiscal
reality says we can't really do both um
I would rather have that pool of money
to be able to pay a PM than I would to
have more
assistance you know in the admin
assistant role right um so what I'm
looking at Kate to do is all the web
stuff um and deal with meetings and
agendas and stuff like that and that's
it and basically I'll give up most of
you know and I've been working that way
for the last four or five months anyway
to try it out before I put it in the
budget so I'm pretty comfortable that I
can get away with that um is there some
limitations yeah yeah um is it
inefficient sometimes if I'm doing
something and not an admin efficient yes
but what I need most is the PM
help all right well I think that's good
context I'll just point out uh for the
board May recognize this but the this is
really a budget neutral change if you
look at it that way we have a $5,000
stien plus a $115,000 project manager
uh uh wages line so that's $20,000 it's
actually slightly less than the 2023
2024 budget for the administrative
system so it's actually a little bit
less um comments questions from the
board on any of the uh Town
Administrator lines yeah
Joan so I can appreciate what Eric is
saying and I understand his reasoning
behind it I often
find as as a resident and someone
looking in that sometimes in our small
small town you know that we're trying to
make so much change and get so many
things done that I can see that I feel
like things aren't getting completed you
know or there can't be enough manpower
or followup and I kind of go more on
let's do some things and get them
completed well versus let's like I know
and Jed LaRon is still on I know we
still have the affordable housing thing
going on what are they going to do
there's just so many things in town that
are half there and ideas that are coming
forward so I only
hesitate with maybe maybe slowing down a
little bit and getting you know because
we are so small and and yes we have a
lot of projects going on now so if this
is the solution and everyone agrees this
as a solution I have no problem with
that but it just gave me the opportunity
to say that sometimes I feel like we
keep going going going going going and
we're not finishing finishing finishing
and they AR said said that it's not a
critique I give people
credit for initiative of wanting to do
so many things that's a great thing but
I'm also a finisher in my own career so
I get what it's like to have to complete
things you know we have a lot of things
started so that's all that's my two
cents so I'll have to juggle in my own
mind what the better use of yeah and
ultimately I think it's just kind of a
board of selectman Slash all right true
I just felt like it was my opportunity
to say it out there because we tend to
go go go and yeah thank you border of
selectman I get
it anybody else questions on the Town
Administrator
section okay we move down to the
treasurer Financial um so Eric obviously
I think we talked a little bit about
this one previously so we're looking at
doubling basically the uh Treasurer
salary we all know we have a very
part-time uh very effective Treasurer
right now she's not to stay around
forever um but I don't know if we have
any more comments about that
Eric no I I mean I I do think that
sometime in this upcoming fiscal year
you know we're going to end up uh Cheryl
will eventually resign sometime in this
year be my guest so we are in the
background working on the replacement
strategy for her I would rather retain
her but I mean she just wants to kind of
be
retired yep
okay and the town Treasurer clerk waves
youve got a significant increase there
um I don't know if we have anything more
to say about
that yeah so the the part of that is the
contractual Union wage but more of that
is a recognition
that you know most weeks she's ending up
working a little more than 30 hours
anyway and the board of selectman agreed
to take that position from 30 to 33
which was the recommendation from Cheryl
the
treasurer so that's what accounts for
that just reflects that change then y
plus the that was my question plus the
the contractual increase okay right so
that's based on what she would have been
getting Eric and then just adding in up
to 33 hours
correct right with whatever the union
negotiated okay
yep thank
you does anybody have any other line
item questions regarding the treasur or
financial uh
section okay we can move down to the
town clerk uh so we did hear from Carol
earlier
um we do have a 5% increase uh applied
in this proposed budget to both her
salary and and to the supplemental
salary and if you caught earlier what
she was saying she's really not asking
for this uh line it or
this 63 or $300 increase on the on
supplemental she's proposing of $6,000
so you know it seems like it's a
no-brainer to take that down to 6,000
so I I will say one thing just
procedurally um rather than make a
motion for each individual line item it
might if we're if we seem to be in
general agreement if there's no
opposition from board members I would
say that we would go ahead and make
corrections to the line items and then
we would vote on them as a package um if
you guys are okay with
that yeah yes yes I'm okay with that any
dissent or concern over
that that sounds like a good deal yeah
sounds fine with me and and so we could
if we had an issue with one particular
line item that we changed at the end
when we vote we could discuss it at that
point U Mark yeah or what I would
propose we do if there's if there's some
real concern or just dissension over a
particular change let's just make a
motion and on that particular I line
item and just call that done Perfect all
right and then we can then we can just
do the rest of them that are not you
know there's no no concern or just
sension over if we're seem to be in full
agreement if everyone agrees we'll just
do that as a as a package motion at the
end right okay so what I would propose
is that we reduce this to
$6,000 agreed agreed
right since she's not asking for
it
okay assistant town clerk salary Union
set by the union conference
seminars minor increase it's 40% but
it's says the cost of conferences and
seminars have increase I mean in my view
I'm not sure most of these worth you
know couple hundred dollars here and
there are really worth
um spending a lot of time on you know
yeah we're not in that unless somebody
sees something just doesn't make any
sense so if we're in agreement on this
does anybody have any other comments
about the town clerk
section I would just add that I think
Carol made a
compelling um statement appreciate them
coming I mean going in I was thinking
the 4% might have been okay based on you
know we had given her a significant
increase last year due to everything we
went you know listen to but she did make
a compelling I mean if it true I'm not
there if it's truly true that there's
some long long days like that and we're
talking not a lot of money I would be
okay with this 5% for this year you know
too that was I'm not going to nickel and
but I think it's it is important when
someone goes a little bit over what
everybody else had gotten that we do
listen to them
yeah that's my take but
y yeah I think that there's a I think we
have to be a little careful because you
know we could continue doing this and
doing this and doing this and there's
also the thing and and I'm just you know
we pay for the position not necessarily
for the experience but you know 5 10
years down the road you get a super
experienc super competent person um in
there and then they leave and you get
somebody who's spending less time as
long as they're doing a job I guess it's
okay but we will set a precedent with
the salary I don't disagree with this
frankly um you know cost of living is
increased I don't think that's a lot of
money for a professional position these
days um you know and there are some long
days there probably are some that are
not so long but you know I'm okay with
it I agree with the not yearby year
that's why it's important you know to to
bring up the history like you know Kim
wasn't on the board last year so she
didn't sit through the whole what we you
know the the the thing so that's that's
a good point too Mark what was the
increase last year
six% I think it was is that right we we
we added that supplemental significant
because we had extra line for her it's a
little bit buried in there so you know I
was actually going to make the point
that we might want to consider just
consolidating that if this is going to
be an ongoing thing you know we may as
well rip the Band-Aid off and say what
we're really doing is paying the the Tom
clerk
$63,750 oh I don't like that I like how
we have it but that's because we were we
had set the ground that if there for the
future you know we'd be able to not
offer the supplemental because we had
the 10 years of experience would get the
supplement m al again we can go back to
that if no I think that's fair you know
it's fair nothing set in stone but I
don't like to rip the Band-Aid off today
I think that is kind of how we talked
about it that it would be something 10
years yeah 10 years experience they'll
get the supplemental you know I mean we
can go Case by I don't know if we
actually you know I I but it's it's a
reasonable way to approach it I
think and that was our good compromise
of being able to give her a significant
raise over 6% you know with the
additional y also I'd like to add that
we can't forget about all the volunteer
stuff that she does for the town as well
she's always
there not asking for money for some for
those items and again I I agree with
that Louise but it's more we're not
supposed to be considering that kind of
like those I get it like like we said
this person's perfect in that role when
like that we're supposed to pull
ourselves away from the person but
you're not wrong yeah we pay her for the
job right so yeah it's the job more than
the person and right yeah but you're
you're not
wrong any other questions or concerns
over the town clerk
section okay hearing none we'll move on
down to the tax
collector uh we actually have a
reduction here and and an increase in
the software maintenance is fairly
significant um Eric maybe you talked
about this but what's going on with the
reduction so we went from an
employee that was a certified tax
collector to hiring somebody that is not
but has to go through the
training so what I did is
I hired her but I made it very clear
that uh I laid out all the steps between
where she is now and we a certified tax
collector and the arrangement I made
with the Union is
that at the point where she gets
certified she goes back to the same
hourly raage wage as the previous but
until she's certified you know her
salary increases with each step level
she attains that okay because what I'm
trying to do is I'm trying to
incentivize the heck out of her for
going through and getting all the
training and getting certified yeah what
kind of process timeline is that just
curious about three years ah okay but
she can get about 80% or
85% of the
difference before so so basically she
can finish all her class work in about a
year and that will get her basically to
about 85 or 90% of the salary but she
technically has to work three years in
the role before she can be a certified
tax collector got it so we'll probably
see most of the financial impact of this
reduction reversed in the next budget
year or possibly assuming she gets
that yes yes okay okay just trying to
get an idea of the timeline yeah okay
um the other question I had think I
highlighted here you notice this qds
plus DMV but you also had a line down on
row 97 here you mentioned the qds
software that contract software manag is
this used by both departments so you're
just kind of splitting it out or what's
the yeah so so we get builds separately
for each office oh because not in every
town does q do is qds used by both
entities but most towns they are so we
get a bill every year we pay bills for
the assessor's office for qds and the
same with the tax
collector
okay okay does anybody have any other
questions are on the tax collector
section
here
okay you're hearing none I guess we'll
move to the assessor real sorry uh I saw
driving to and from classes is that part
of the
uh credentials or whatever yeah okay yes
so in fact she was at class pretty much
all day today um that's good question
Brian yeah so yep so are we we're paying
her to go to go to the class as well or
is that
mileage so we p no I I just wonder if
she's if she's going to if she's on the
clock when she's in the class yep
absolutely
okay
understood she's obviously the lower
rate though so and that doesn't really
change much for us as long as she's
getting the job done I
guess okay good
questions other questions or comments
okay let's move down to the assessor
line we already talked about the qds
software
increases we got a small increase on the
assessor and assistant assessor salary
and then significant although you know
just a few couple hundred bucks for the
uh NADA uh book uh this is the Auto
Dealers Association book that allows
them to estimate the value of the uh uh
of the automob of the uh cars and trucks
and stuff that are property tax related
right ER yeah and and this is one where
all the towns are getting screwed and
that's one of the reasons why there are
a bunch of reasons but why they want to
get why there was an effort to shift
away from NADA values for assessments on
cars was because NADA got bought out and
the cost they're charging the assessors
Association in the state has gone up
really dramatically so they're talking
about going to a straight depreciation
model instead of using NADA values um
that was supposed to have been
implemented in this budget cycle but
it's been delayed by the legislature
twice um and of course now the
legislature is talking about eliminating
car taxes totally so obvious we wouldn't
need that if they eliminate car taxes
but um I don't think that's actually
going to happen
so interesting I had heard that oh
yeah okay any uh questions on this
section Eric any further things for
discussion all right let's move down to
the registar section um we did hear from
the
registrars uh about some of the things
that are going on in their world why
they're requesting this 5% increase I
will note that the values that are in
there right now only represent a 4%
increase so the values that are in there
are not a 5% increase it sounds like
they did request 5% but the calculation
though is only bringing it to about a
4% so we can certainly change that to
meet their
5% request
now I'm not opposed these people work
pretty hard they don't get paid that
much well considering what you talked
about Mark with the amount of days with
the early voting
and all the other things it sounds like
they're going to be putting in a lot
more
hours so it doesn't seem unreasonable in
my opinion anyways yeah it's a tough job
too it's long how many people want to do
it just want to note that I was one of
the 20 people that voted today
anybody have any other thoughts on
that should we i t to yeah I tend to
agree with you on that because you know
I do a lot I do some of the um work over
there as well and I see how much is
involved so I don't think an extra
one% is
unreasonable we're talking just to
clarify we're talking talking about the
salary line the 106 yes yeah you know
you know what the difference computes to
it's it's like 130 bucks yeah yeah
that's I was gonna say you take 120 you
know 12, Ma it's yeah 12978 I mean for
goodness sakes let's do do
[Music]
it
trying to find the right keys on this
keyboard is not
uh Mark can you just highlight all the
ones that you change that way I can go
back in because I'm I mean the way the
this spreadsheet Works you're meant to
to do the individual Fields not the over
it should be changed in the tab right so
correct all right so I'll I'll highlight
it in light blue
okay which means do we highly we change
anything up here we changed that one of
the top um yeah that one yeah there we
go
okay hey look at that calculates to 5%
we must have done something right
there's
further questions on the registar
[Music]
section
nope okay moving down to elections um
you know we
have we have some increases here mostly
for election salaries again we kind of
heard um what the differentials uh were
again it seems like big numbers but
we're only talking about a $6,000
increase and it's not needed it won't
get used I guess is some some one
observation um I would think anyway in
terms of salaries and what you know I
certainly don't dispute that these
people need some pizza delivered to them
in the middle of the work day or
whatever they're when they're doing this
work they're not they're not paid much
and we have volunteers helping out
whatever so yeah me I'm I'm good with
all this but I'm I'm good
good okay I'm not sure this note here I
just pointed out this is a little
confusing to me it says 10% increase
check number from
2324 so was Eric were you thinking that
that number that was in here was maybe
not
correct uh hang on let me pull up there
again we're not we're only talking small
differentials here but I
just yeah that that 178 number I think
was
incorrect it's not it's not here okay
all
right
okay so Sauk we're in agreement for
leaving this right where it is then
yes okay building department um we've
got a 7% uh increase uh the Wages that's
contract uh admin same
thing Inland Wetlands commission 1.1% no
real change there not significant uh we
do have an increase in the zoning Agent
salary we heard from Jed on the reason
for that I mean to me
that's you know again 15 to 19 hours is
that what it was yeah yeah correct yeah
so I mean it says that there's actually
a 31.7% increase so yeah it's slightly
less than 33 than the 5 hours
but doesn't sound like that's you know
unwarranted and again I it was helpful
to hear him talk about the need and and
I certainly would agree with this these
are not easy things to do when you're
trying to manage that the blight
ordinance and everything else so yeah
and those
are I think that's huge benefit to our
town frankly
absolutely and just for the history of
that the board of Select
after last year's budget was adopted
made the decision because they weren't
getting enough done that they wanted on
the on blight complaints um and they
basically motioned and made me increase
that from 15 to 19 hours so we're
actually he's been working 19 hours you
know basically this whole budget year
the whole current budget year oh the
entire year yeah Jud said something
about that but I okay yeah so we will
overex expend this year on that we're
not over yet but by the end of the year
we will certainly be overexpanded in
this budget year but again that was a
direct you know decision by the board of
Select yeah just a followup Mark so I
guess the whole 19h hour thing Eric is
the benefits situation correct so mean
why do we not 20 hours corre well no I
mean I'm thinking I know that it's
because Jed had said well I don't know
why there's 20 and not you know 19 is
significant so we we make sure that he
does his 19 because of the benefit right
he would have to offer benefits if he
goes over yeah went
up correct by we are
required through the state what we we
would not have to offer health care
benefits but at 20 hours he would
automatically be enrolled in the town's
retirement program and murf and that's
that's a big percentage okay yep so okay
thank
you and note on the permit link fees
you've got a you got an explanation
there was kind of hidden but I just
opened it up this is an increase i' seen
the earlier this is an expense increase
but it's offset by charge of the
customer through the permits that are
issued right right
everybody that pulls a permit pays a $15
fee when they pull a permit um and that
that fee essentially goes to permit link
but we show it on the revenue side and
we show it on the expense side
okay all right any comments questions um
recommended changes to the building
department
section
okay hearing none we can move
on the next section is the
library uh we do have 6.3% increase in
the wages um noting uh minimum wage
increase is affecting there um so is
that must be driving most of it I guess
yeah that that's the primary driver of
that um you know for the purposes of
calculation
I so and one of the things that's
unfortunate is we don't know what
minimum wage is going to be set at next
year um because the state hasn't made
that determination yet um like you know
it went up to 15 something uh right now
um we're assuming it's going to go up a
little bit so so that's why it's not
6.3% it's actually less than that comp
compared to what they're making today
but remember as of December
31st minimum wage increased based on
state law so we had to respond to that
yeah
yeah any questions or comments in the
library
section okay hearing hearing none we'll
go on to the Civil
preparedness
we have a civil preparedness salary
budget up at 4% 3% rounded up slightly
paid twice per year you
know $30 differential over what it was
previously I don't really see any issues
here at least for me no so there is a
slight chance that will go up
significantly but it will only go up if
we get the Civil preparedness Grant uh
for the the state paying for that
Sal So It Be offet by a Grant Line in
the revenue side yeah so we it's not
something we've ever asked for before
but we can ask for and so we are going
to ask for it this year and if we do get
it we will increase the the stien for
that and then be able to get more done
who are you paying is it like a civil
preparedness director or something like
that yeah so I am technically the e
Emergency Management director but there
is uh an emergency management
coordinator um that is also the person
that runs the CT program uh for the town
um so that is who that salary goes for
and it's a it's a pretty small stipend
considering you
know what they're actually required to
do
anybody have any questions or comments
on the Civil preparedness
section okay so moving down we have town
office building I just got to make a
note that you know our subtotal here
we're at about a 5% 5.8% increase for
these
Services um obviously our line item at
the end uh is significant for the town
budget so we'll see we'll see some of
this go up town office building payroll
service is being dropped because we're
transitioning away from Prime
pay yeah we're not we can't eliminate
all our costs from Prime pay because
we're still using their time
clocks um we're considering other time
clock methods or other time clock
vendors because they're charging us an
awful lot just to continue to use their
time clocks but that's what the cost
would be
compared to you
know uh what we were
paying okay water testing going up the
percentage is high but it's just you
know
$200
so
requirements again elevator contract 6%
couple bucks not really anything there
so I had a question the permit y go
ahead Louise it looks kind of weird and
sort of funding is that is that a
mistake Eric that is a mistake the the
previous last year we did actually
budget
$2,400 2223 we did not but our elevator
permit is $240 a year not
2400 oh so that's correct but the
earlier budget was a mistake you're
saying correct we missed it in last
year's budget oh okay so 240 is correct
then correct okay you even have your
annual
state
right all right I can't spell
but I got you covered the 21 to 22 was
also
240 right these were an error basically
yeah and if you look yes correct all
right computer tech support we got a
cost of living increase Building
Maintenance you know poster the actual
cost of where building maintenance is
saying so you're basically saying 4500
is a little more accurate it's only a
couple hundred doll
there Civic ready up Civic plus this is
our website poster posting Place yeah
Civic ready is uh uh that is the
emergency alert uh and Civic plus is the
website okay um so we bined we pay for
both of those
Services um we we do need a new contract
for civic
plus um they are you know obviously
they're trying to upsell us and go to a
fancier platform but we're we're
basically saying no we're gonna we do
have to migrate from our existing Drupal
platform to a new Drupal platform
because the one we're on now will no
longer be supported but as long as we go
Drupal to Drupal we don't don't have to
do anything so that's what we're
uh you know we don't have the the
options that the fancier ones have um
and we've considered it and and looked
through what what advantages it would be
to pay more money and get a more
sophisticated version of it but in the
end I don't I just don't see
the I don't see enough value for what
for the cost difference so we're
continuing on with the cheap version
okay alarm moning 10 per is 50
bucks actual expense on postage based on
2023 increase assuming same number cents
5.7 so it's just a more realistic figure
you're saying post well that that's just
the relative how much the post office
fees have gone up you know per piece
mailed and we just assume that our uh
mailing will be about the same correct
there's the early voting doesn't have
any impact on that right so early voting
no no but like how many Town meetings we
hold you know that kind of stuff does
does have a pretty big effect yeah
okay Grass Drive drop a little bit just
to more Rel reflect more accurately the
prior Year's
expense electricity so so we're a little
bit off of the peak so it's actually
dropped you're reducing that a little
bit no more fuel oil switched to propane
for
building propane you're showing a $3,500
so there's a net reduction of the budget
at $1,500 in fuel corre cost
okay now the only thing that's a little
touchy with propane is that un like fuel
oil fuel oil consistently the best time
to lock in for the next next fiscal year
is like The Descendant December to
January um and with propane it's always
cheapest to lock in over the summer you
know when the Futures Contract rates are
the lowest so unlike fuel oil which we
would have already locked in for now um
propane were not likely to lock in till
after the budget year is started so
that's a little bit more of a a gamble
but 175 seems to be fairly realistic and
something something bad Global happens
okay is Community Center going to share
the same uh fuel source or uh the
community center will be uh exclusively
heat pump for heating ah the only the
only propane for that will be for the
commercial
stove
okay so it will just piggyback on we're
not g to have a separate line item it
just piggybacks off the same tank yeah
it makes
sense basically $2,000 increase or 57%
on office supplies you're noting that
we're consistently overspending this
budget in Prior years so this is a more
realistic
figure makes
sense and that pretty much brings us to
the end I mean we have a increase too in
the computer repair services it's
probably just a market increase anybody
have any questions that Eric hasn't
already addressed or
comments all set by me all set
okay well let's go on to the community
center this one might be a little more
interesting so um this is all new we
haven't had any of these expenses in our
budget before uh I know some people were
asking some questions about the uh wages
for the director and asked about the job
description um and the kind of question
came up about whether full-time director
is
needed um you know I haven't looked at
this question certainly but um it does
seem like a for a small town a full-time
position out there is is a lot to me uh
but I haven't done put a lot of thought
into what we're asking them to do it
seems like there's a lot of stuff
outside of like normal just running the
you know senior activities or something
there's a fair amount on that job
description and they're all it's all a
benefit to the town so you know I'm I'm
not feeling super strongly one way or
other but this is a significant increase
to the to the town's expense for sure
now Town wanted this there's no doubt
about that that was made very clear in a
lot of meetings that I know all of you
would have uh you know heard those uh
those discussions uh but uh that that is
uh means we got to pay for it it seems
like in my opinion um it's it's okay
Mark that I mean you think about Carol
Le's position how long she's been doing
that job very important job a lot of
hours she's making less than that it
just seems like a lot of money oh that's
true she's making a little more with
with the supplement but yeah well all
right with something now but I mean
again our town clerk for how many
years um and this is a brand new
position I'm I'm just thinking myself
like they're G to be scheduling events I
I I don't know enough about the position
it just seems like a lot of money in my
opinion for the for the position but I
don't know a lot about the position I'm
for a brand new position I'm trying to
justify in my head
$60,000 I hadn't thought about that with
the Carol angle yeah
also lot of those things on the job
description she does some of those
things already too so like especially
the recreation planning things like that
um for some of the stuff on there but
two things one Carol isn't necessarily
gonna be the
down for all that much
longer
and the board of Selectmen wanted to
switch the responsibility of that from
Carol to whoever ran the comp Center
so that way you do control it right
especially if she were to move on or
retire or something then yeah we don't I
mean it's actually through the rec
center not just through Carol through
the rec commission I'm sorry um not just
through Carol I just had that in
there I don't I don't want to take the
lead on this I want everybody else to
speak I I definitely have some clear
opinions on it because I kind of got
swayed in a meeting so I'll listen to
everybody else thought but but I do want
to acknowledge that Bill's point about
where the wage scale is I think it could
be a little high too but but again I'm
gonna sit back and then I definitely
have some quick thoughts I want to
extend one thing I would say about the
wage scale is we have to be a little
careful about comparing it to right what
we have in place now um right we also
have to compare it to what the market is
out there and that's what I'll speak to
I've got Factory maintenance technicians
that are making this much
money yeah that's the way the world is
right now this is a different job you
know and it's a different orientation I
understand that but I just want to make
that point um so we so we consider that
as we as we evaluate
it and again I don't know if Eric if you
wanted for our benefit because I don't
know all the details I mean could you
discuss some of the other uh responsib
abilities this person would have um just
so we get a better idea of what we're
paying
for sure so I looked at it as
essentially providing three
functions um the first is for lack of a
better term director of the SE of what
would be a senior center um that is
managing senior
Transportation um you know which
includes hiring firing drivers doing all
the scheduling and dealing with the
paperwork for C do uh for the grant
programs um you know managing the
luncheon program the senior trips
program and then you know so so that's
kind of the senior focused programming
the other thing that I see is a really
big shortfall of where we are now in
terms of senior program programming is
that we don't have any real active
senior
program um you know we have Bingo and
you know we have things of and we have
movie night but there's nothing active
and if you look at what most senior
centers are doing they have a strong
component towards exercise related stuff
you know and that's something we don't
do any of um which we probably should so
that's one hat um the second hat is all
the programming and scheduling related
to a normal community center right
because this this facility is going to
function as both and then the third
thing is switching the recreational
programming and
scheduling you know onto one you know
person you know that's accountable and
that person as I see it
is for lack of a better word one of the
Three director level positions in the
town one being myself one being Jay
Tuttle one being whoever handles that
end of things um so that would mean
getting the board of Selectmen directly
out of the the field coordination stuff
putting all that on that person um that
person should be doing coordination with
with ahm both for summer programming um
and then starting to shift Services
onsite here as opposed to making all the
Andover residents go to Hein when they
need ahm
Services um you know the board of
Selectmen was adamant that they want to
make that facility available for rental
and special events and try to bring in
some income doing that and that means
somebody is going to have to to manage
that um and that person you most senior
community centers deal with their own
grant writing because there's a fair
amount of Revenue that's available for
those types of entities um and we're not
going after a lot of that now
um you know and we should be you know I
mean we just took delivery of
$130,000 vehicle for senior
transportation that we got because you
know Kathy pazi wrote the grant um with
a little bit of help from me but not a
lot um and that's the kind of payoff uh
we have so I see and they ought to be
responsible for their budget and fiscal
management for everything that happens
in the community center and then the
last thing is that eventually that
building will be the town's emergency
shelter um and whoever runs that is
going to have to have an active role in
shelter operations when needed
because we really need to transition
that away from the school um for for a
bunch of different reasons but one of
them being if you're using this school
as a shelter you're not using it for its
primary purpose which is educating kids
so those are kind of the the general so
I I see basically three distinct hats
for this person you know Senior Services
community services and Recreation Based
Services as being their their job and
them being a department head responsible
for their own
budgeting um you know and then if we
decide that that's more than we want to
do then I think we're looking at a
part-time
position but I I don't know that I mean
if we were going to go to a part-time
position I would probably try to find
somebody that was retired and worked in
a senior center or ran a senior center
and wanted some
part-time um but you know that would not
be a director level position and we
would probably just strip it back to
just the senior related stuff and drop
everything else from the job
description um if you want to make it
parttime so that's kind of how I look at
it um but you know all right yeah thanks
Eric I'm gonna I'm gonna make a you know
my I guess I'll comment on what my
position would be on
this um this is new stuff as I said it
was pretty clear that town wanted the
community
center the board of Selectmen uh working
with Eric have kind of defined the roles
and responsibilities and frankly there a
lot there's a lot you know little pieces
that they're thinking this person is
going to be taking on so you know
where's the salary need to be you know
we can we quibble about that I think the
real question is probably is it a
full-time or part-time
position I am in favor of leaving this
right where it is for uh a couple of
reasons like I said first the town told
us that they wanted this community
center this is an important aspect of of
what we're doing as a town and I I'm
kind of agnostic originally I looked at
and said yeah gez you really need a
full-time person but we have not I I
would be in favor of leaving it where it
is we still have to have our hearing on
the budget and we still have to have our
budget meeting to me I think if the town
taxpayers are very averse to paying for
a full-time position they're going to
make that you know this the opportunity
is going to be there for them to voice
that concern and to uh you know make the
change during the town budget meeting
should we decide to leave it at we can
you know certainly once the budget
hearing is is done we have our budget
hearing meeting it's not usually that
well attended but but hopefully we'll
get some attention if we if we get
you know some push back and saying you
know hey you know we this is makees
sense to do a full-time position you
guys should reduce it we're hearing that
elsewhere we can always take that action
later after the meeting but I would be
in favor of leaving it right where it is
right now and kind of
letting kind of letting the feedback
come to us to see see what see where
people are in the
town I have a question on
that are the benefits of that person
included in that 60,000 or is there
going to be a separate line item for
that no you if you went to the benefit
Sub sub you would see that there there's
I make two assumptions for this that
this person will get murf um so they
will be enrolled in the retirement plan
and they I you know just to be safe I
said well assume for healthare benefits
that they will be a one plus one a
person for a spouse now maybe get really
lucky and they want to do fee in Li of
and that saves us a bunch of money but
for Budget purposes you got to assume
you know they're going to be both
retirement and health care okay but if
that goes down to a a part-time less
than 20 hours which is probably not even
reasonable um that means the benefits
would wouldn't be there right correct
okay okay my thoughts on this this guys
now that I had listened to the board of
Selectmen too and I was more in favor of
part-time at the beginning and starting
slow but when you're in a role like this
and you're responsible for so
much um in the way the town is just
opening this community Senior
Center um we have so many seniors that
have wanted this for so long so we want
it to be done right we need to have a
responsible person it's not scheduling
either it's not just putting it on a
calendar it's making sure all the
permits are correct it's going to be you
know I don't know what kind of programs
are going to go but there's a lot of
things to it and I like the idea of when
they talked about it it was scheduling
for the whole town the fields the
activities the PE um you know programs
at AES in the AES gym I mean we kind of
do that where I work now um
obviously the school has first dibs on
everything that you know that is in that
building whether it's a library or the
gym or whatever whatever activities are
going on for the school but this person
would work in concert with the school
people like Eric had mentioned you know
in consult with the Recreation
Commission in consult with social
services and hopefully everything that
ahm could bring in concert with um the
senior center because all the people
that are are involved in these things in
our town are really close to retiring
too and they're going to bring all that
knowledge with them um it's a big
responsibility um I could see I know
Eric set the goal high with the salary
I've seen some advertised salaries
Mark's right I mean it depends where you
work you can get higher salaries
wherever this is a small town I'm
comparing it to what I've seen
advertised for smaller
towns I didn't quibble too much about
the salary I think the salary could be a
little bit lower but like you said
that's not what we're here for for I
mean you have to set up an office you
have to set up all the paperwork you've
got to get everything going you've got
to get your plans ready you've got it's
not just walking in and it's going to
work I mean I just think you have to
give a little grace to getting a whole
program set up and running and it's a
big undertaking for the town so that's
my two cents initially I thought
part-time all the way but then I was
thinking of the backup work that has to
be done
um and it's a lot you know and I'm more
of it's a 40-hour position there's a few
people in town I think Eric put
something like 35 I'm not in favor of
that for this I would think this would
definitely be a five day a week position
maybe taking an afternoon off if they're
going to do an evening event but that's
you know so that's that's my thought I
think there's a lot to this I also
wanted to ask Eric I was big on I know
that there's people in the building that
get stiped
um not to take money away from someone
but if you're going to have a position
like this that is a big position then I
wouldn't think people in the town that
are doing senior luncheons or senior
Transportation or getting stiens for
that I think those will go away am I
correct uh right now senior
Transportation um everything else
related to
seniors is
running you know completely with
volunteer um the drivers get paid but
those are the only paid
positions I know there's a person but I
don't want to name a person in this
there's someone getting a stien for some
of this work I would hope that stien you
know would go away well no actually I
don't think that should because I think
that should be that is one role I do not
want the senior center director I don't
want the senior center director being
the social services person um and in
agent for the town um I very definitely
want those two roles
separate I highly disagree but sorry
it's not a it's not here for me to
decide that but if you're going to bring
on a full-time person and then have
programs and things the person that's
doing it now has her own job but again
that's I I don't want to debate that but
if we're gonna consider a big full-time
there's definitely space in this that's
those should be married I would think
Eric can you can you expound on your
reasons why you think they should be
kept um
separate yeah because I I think you're
you're dealing with kind of two you know
in on the one hand you're running a
facility and you're running a whole
series of programs you know and on the
other hand you're dealing
with um a bunch of things that
are
um you know like like for instance
anytime we get into a bad hoarding
situation that's a social services
person doing it the person that's you
know getting people and dealing with
operation fuel that's Social Services um
getting involved whenever we have a Vic
that's Social Services that's not
Community Center related stuff so I see
those as two very distinct different job
functions I I see exactly what you're
saying thank you Eric I'll have to have
a private conversation with you because
maybe I'm not understanding what I
thought I was thinking so clearly that
wouldn't be together I was I was
thinking of more Social Services
bringing in things to the community
center that would
um so maybe maybe there's a huge need in
our town that that person gets a stien
for doing those things that you talked
about I didn't know that thank you I
guess I'll I'm GNA drop my original um
objection to the 60,000 and just let us
move on
here well this is our one chance to have
a conversation I don't mind conflict or
asking questions so I hope I'm not
offputting but I I think our time to
have a healthy debate yeah we should be
talking about financing of this yeah
that's what we're here for Brian did you
have a comment yeah I'm not opposed to
it I like the idea of putting it to the
towns people that's that was like a
brilliant idea because you know they're
I thought it was a really good idea but
you know I'm looking and I'm not
debating whether the wage is too much
part-time or any of that but like is one
person G to a be able to handle all
these things what if they're sick you
know there's seven days of the week
instead of five people are going to be
using it on the weekend um I don't see
an assistant there and maybe it makes
more sense to have multiple part-time
and I don't know the I don't know how
many seniors we really have that
necessitate and um I don't know the what
we anticipate for the community to come
out to actually use the community center
I don't know if there's been any surveys
or anything um so I don't know there's
just a lot of questions and I don't
think it's as straightforward a lot of
these things are handled um with various
uh boards you know and uh I'm not sure I
just I don't know it's tough to call
because it's so new right yeah you know
and there might be a little bit of the
chicken in the egg thing it's like you
know how much demand is there going to
you know how much is going on there but
if you had somebody promoting it and
managing it maybe a lot more could go
down there but how much how many people
are really going to use it it's a it's a
tough it's a tough thing to kind of sus
out yeah so that's where I'm at but I
like your idea about putting it for the
town to to also make it they get their
uh their opinion on it
other uh other comments questions or
suggestions
here well should we move on then do you
guys want to kind of leave it as it is
for now and this I think it's good that
we got to just talk about it you know
and and see because we received the the
job descriptions that was good yeah it
was it's good to have it's not our last
whack at it we can come back and revisit
we learn more think about it ruminate it
I'm I'm good with moving on yeah yeah I
think letting the town talk with us
about it is a great idea yeah getting
getting some input anyway yeah I
definitely think that that's a good idea
okay well I'm gonna make a suggestion
and I'll leave this up to the board to
vot we've we've done pretty well here
we've actually gotten through quite a
bit of this um it's almost nine o'clock
I'm running out of steam because I was
picking somebody up at the airport again
at midnight last night and at an early
meeting so it's not about me but if I
start to snore then you'll know why uh
but I'm gonna propose that we consider
bringing this to a close and picking up
again in our next meeting we did make a
lot of progress here I think we did well
I'll make the motion that we uh
adjourn py I just one question
before you do that is that is there
anything you want that I haven't given
you so far for the next
meeting is there anybody you want to
talk to specifically or anything you
want to know prior to that meeting that
I can
supply not off the top anyone I'll just
say thanks again Eric you add a lot of
clarity to to so much of this so thank
you I don't have anything else yeah I
think we've we've asked for everything
now it's just getting through it and
then
eventually you know the bottom line
things yeah no
good okay so you know I don't think we
necessarily need a motion to and pass a
motion on some of the adjustments we
made in this uh meeting they won't
become official until we do make a
motion and vote on them but we can kind
of hold them in as placeholders until we
next regroup and then and then vote on
it at that time if everybody's is okay
with that um just makes things a little
more
clean um any other questions comments
before we did we get a second on that
motion to adjourn yeah Brian did okay
Brian did okay thanks Brian um any
further
discussion comments questions now's your
chance okay we'll have a vote all those
in favor say I I I any
opposed no one no one wants to keep
talking about
this any
exensions hearing none motion passes the
meeting is adjourned thank you very much
everybody have a great weekend and again
if you have questions you might want
Eric or somebody else to entertain
answering during in advance of our next
meeting just by all means share those